Hey everyone, welcome back to AI Quick Bits. I'm your host, Scott Panzing, and in this episode I discuss the world of AI ethics and responsible AI, and ethics in general, with Reid Blackman, founder and CEO of Virtue, an AI ethical risk consultancy. Reid is also the author of the book Ethical Machines, and hosts a podcast by the same name. Virtue designs responsible AI programs, and their clients include Amazon, Etsy, Kraft Heinz, Merck, US Bank, Nationwide, and more. Reid's written work has appeared in the Harvard Business Review and the New York Times, and prior to founding Virtue, Reid was a professor of philosophy at Colgate University and UNC Chapel Hill. I hope you enjoy the discussion. Well Reid, thank you so much for your time today. I really appreciate you coming on the show. Yeah, it's my pleasure. All right, well I just want to say, just get a few things off my chest right at the beginning. I will say, I do highly recommend your book, Ethical Machines. It's not required reading for my course at UCLA Extension, but I do recommend it to my students, and I also definitely enjoy your sub stack and your podcast of the same name, Ethical Machines, so I just want to get that stuff out of the way. I'll put all the links to your content in the show notes. Yeah, cool. Sounds good. Thanks. So I would like to ask you first just about your AI ethical risk consultancy, Virtue. I like how on your website you mentioned things like, I think you say something like you don't want to be like an oracle or a priest or an activist, but you really want to get people to make informed and wise ethical decisions. So I think that kind of ties into this sub stack piece you did recently where you were like, hey, maybe some of you don't really know exactly what ethics is or what ethicists do, and I wondered if you might touch on that a little bit. Yeah, sure. That sounds great. I think that there's a big difference between being an activist and an ethicist, and a lot of people confuse that. So they think that, oh Reed, you're an ethicist or an AI ethicist, whatever you want to call it, and you work with companies. And so you're, you know, you're really fighting the good fight. And I think, really not, you know, I think that what I do has a positive ethical impact, blah, blah, blah. But I'm not someone who has, I mean, I do. In my professional life, I don't have these ethical goals, and I'm trying to push people towards those ethical goals. So I'm not trying to get businesses to do the thing that I think that they ought to do, because I think it's the right thing to do, and that's my moral view, and blah, blah, blah, blah. That's not what I do. To the extent that I, excuse me, to the extent that I talk to my clients about what their ethical view ought to be, or what their values or principles ought to be, I really see myself more in the role of a professor than a prophet, if you like. And what a philosophy professor does in their capacity as the professor is to help students understand the issues, appreciate the different sides of the issues, the reasons for holding various positions, and then helping them think through where they stand. That's what I did when I was a professor for a decade. And so now when it's with clients, it's the same, or at least a similar kind of role, where it's, let me help you see things more clearly, and make a wise, informed decision. It's not to say, hey, I'm the ethicist. I'm all-knowing about what's good and bad and right and wrong. I'm going to tell you what's good and bad and right and wrong, and now you should go do that. That's not going to fly. Yeah, I find that a lot of it is about getting people to ask questions that they didn't even think they should be asking. A lot of times they have kind of a surface level, yes, okay, we should consider privacy or bias, but there are so many more other things that they should consider that maybe they haven't even thought of in the first place. Yeah, who should ask it? What should they be asking? How should they be asking? What tools should they be using to ask it? Who should they seek help from in order to ask those questions? What kind of organizational support should be there so people can ask those questions? All that stuff. Okay, so I have kind of another question about ethics in business, which is where you operate. I guess it's sort of a question of, well, we don't want to go first here. Well, first I would say there's this question of, I'm going to put a pin in ethics for business for just a second. The question of, and this is touched on in your book, about ethics being subjective or not, and that when someone says in a room like, isn't this all just subjective that sometimes the air just completely goes out of the room and you've lost everyone. I think where I've sort of landed is like, there may be a case for ethics being subjective, sure, but whether it's subjective or not, that doesn't mean we should throw out all ethical inquiry, evidence-based conversations. You still need to kind of create some type of system for mitigating reputational risk, et cetera. So would you comment on that? Do you find that that is often a problem where people say, ethics is all subjective and so what are we even doing here? Or is it not so much anymore? Yeah. You know, I think people do still sometimes say that, although usually by the time they've gotten to me, that's not what they're thinking. They're more thinking in that, if you like, more pragmatic perspective of what are the risks that we got to look out for here and how do we mitigate them? You know, I do think that there are some people, I know there's lots of people who do think it's subjective. And I suppose, you know, you actually just brought out a really nice point, which is there's sort of two ways of responding to that. One, and this is what I did in the book, is to say, you don't have really good grounds for claiming that ethics is subjective. I bet you that you think that ethics is subjective for one of three reasons, and they're all horrendous reasons. And I'm going to explain to you what those are. That's, you know, one of the chapters of the book. The other strategy though, which is the strategy that you just indicated was something like, well, let's grant that it's subjective. What does that entail? Does that entail that you shouldn't have any kinds of values for your organization, that you shouldn't take any kind of accounting of what the risks are, or at least what, here's why, I think I may put it this way in the book, what not unreasonable people take to be ethically good and bad and right and wrong. And if you're sensitive to that, that there are people who think there are things that are ethically good and bad and right and wrong, and sure, it's subjective, fine, let's grant it for the sake of argument. Nonetheless, you've now got to do something about it. And now we're going to do all the things that we have to do if we think that ethics is objective anyway. So I think actually, that strategy I did not highlight in the book, and you just did, and I think it's the smart thing to say. Yeah, I mean, to be clear, I'm not, I just, I concede that it may be subjective, right? I mean, it's like, it's not necessarily my view. But yeah, so, but I think now I can go back to the question I was originally going to ask, which is about ethics with business. How would I frame this to you? It seems like businesses, okay, for sure, they want to make money. The idea is to make money from customers. And it does seem like ethics in business is not necessarily taking a stand, which is what it's perceived to be. But it just moves with customer sentiment, which I think you do touch on in the book. It's been a little while since I read it. But for example, the George Floyd thing happened years ago. And it was perceived knowledge by businesses, that most of our customers would like us to take a stand. So many companies did. And then here you are several years later. And I believe it sort of seems like, well, it's perceived that far fewer of our customers necessarily have the sentiment. So we're gonna, many companies sort of shed those stances that they took firmly in their logos and on their websites and whatnot. So yeah, I guess the question is kind of like, is that really like ethics in business? That's not really taking a stand if it sort of is just about, oh, I want the most money out of my customers. I just want to please my customers. Yeah, so, okay, there's a few things to say here. One thing to say is that you could be doing the right thing for the wrong reason. So maybe let's just say, for the sake of argument, the ethically right thing to do is to stand for this, whatever it is, George Floyd, blah, blah, blah. And then you're doing it in order to appease customers. So that would be a case of doing the right thing for the wrong reason. And that was rampant. So is there ethics? Well, they're doing the right thing, we're gonna suppose, for the sake of argument, but they're doing it for the wrong reason. That's one thing to say. The second thing to say is that this taking a stand, thinking of ethics as taking a stand is, in my estimation, to confuse being an activist with being an ethicist. Activists take stands. Ethicists, and when I say ethicists, I really primarily mean here people with PhDs in philosophy who usually are professors and who specialize in ethics. Not everyone with a PhD in philosophy is an ethicist. Some do philosophy of mind or epistemology. So there's different kinds of philosophers and a subset of them are ethicists. They're engaged in a kind of intellectual inquiry of trying to figure out the truth about what's right and wrong and good and bad, blah, blah, blah. Obviously, there's lots more to say on that front, but it's not about taking a stand. Professional ethicists wouldn't say to each other, so what are you taking a stand on? What are you talking about? I'm trying to understand the foundation of moral knowledge. It gets super abstract. Or maybe they'll say something like, I'm investigating or I'm researching the ways in which, or the context in which I think euthanasia is morally permissible or morally impermissible and how that ought to affect policy. It's not a stand. It's really subtle analysis in an attempt to figure out the truth. So to go back to the thing, when you think, oh, businesses and ethics, ethics and business, sorry, should they be taking a stand? If they want to be activist-y, if you like, but I don't think that's the core of what ethics is about. It's in there. It's a part of it, but it's not the core thing. And then if you're talking especially about, as I do, AI ethics, it's even less about taking a stand on some big issue and much more about doing your due diligence to make sure that things don't go really ethically catastrophically wrong. Right. I like it, for example, in development or even pre-development, let alone of products, but also just how your organization is set up, etc. Yeah. I think another concept I'd like to touch on that you mentioned in your book and a lot of your content is this AI for good and AI for not bad. And it's sort of like, you know, there's AI for good, of course, like they're using machine learning to help cure diseases or prevent a species from going extinct, etc. But often the context or conversation is more about, I don't want to either, well, hopefully people don't want to create products that do bad, so they want to make sure that they prevent something that they maybe have overlooked so that they don't incorporate bias or any kind of other problem with their product. Yeah. Yeah. You know, AI for good is more along the lines of the activist stuff, you know, I have a particular ethical goal, you know, I'm wearing my, I'm wearing, if you like, the ethical credentials of the goal on my sleeve. I have an ethically valuable goal, maybe it's curing disease or lifting people out of poverty or blah, blah, blah. And I'm going to use the powerful tool that is AI in order to pursue that ethical goal. And for some people, they don't like to say the word ethics and they'll say, I'm pursuing the United Nations Sustainability Development Goals, the SDGs. So how do I use AI to pursue the SDGs? But for them, for most organizations, certainly, certainly large corporations, small corporations for that matter, they're not, they might be pursuing a goal that is ethical, but that's not really the thing that they're doing. They're doing their thing that drives their business, which is either ethically good or ethically neutral. So let's assume that it's not ethically bad. And then they want to say, okay, how do I do it without going ethically sideways? My, my end is fine. I want to make sure that the means to the end is also fine. Got it. Yeah, that makes, that makes a lot of sense. I mean, I'm curious also, oh, go ahead. Oh, I'll say one last thing. I actually think that, you know, if there were sort of ethical principle number one, it would be something like do no harm. No, before you do good first, don't, don't beat up a bunch of people. And a business goal is watch out for your bottom line. It's like, if there's a business goal, it's watch out for the bottom line. And that, and there's of course, at least two sides of the bottom line. There's you know, capitalize on the opportunities to bring in revenue. And then there was don't run into roadblocks that drain your bottom line, like getting sued out of existence or something along those lines. And so this, what I call AI for not bad is a place where I think ethics, ethical principles, and business objectives align. Because first, do no harm to your brand and the people that it impacts. That's both business wise and ethically wise. Speaking of, I guess, sort of maybe normative rules that we that we might, like you said, like do no harm in the AI space. I think a lot of people, many people that I talked to would agree with kind of a blanket rule, something like a human should always, it should always be disclosed whether or not you're interacting with a human or not, or something appears to be mimicking a human that it should reveal itself to be so. And it would seem to me like that is pretty commonly wide, a wide held belief. And however, it also appears to me that the temptation of companies because these new products, large language models, etc, are can seem so lifelike, that it is a and and because it is just a tried and true method of increasing sales or time spent or whatever the metric is, that that emotional connection is whether it's there's a few that are just tried and true, but like sex sales or but emotional connection is another one. So it just seems like these many companies can't help themselves to sort of try to make a product seem lifelike and not disclose that. And do we really, are we going to really need regulation to it seems like that should be something that would be at ease like a like a slam dunk or a layup, perhaps, you know, in the space. But it seems like there's already there's a real problem with that just kind of core, you know, thing that seems sort of like common sense to a lot of people. Yeah, so fortunate to say that I never understood the phrase, it's a layup, because I can't do a layup, it strikes me it's really difficult to do. I definitely can't. And I can do neither of those things. Um, so. So yes, companies are going to do it. I guess your question is your question something like, why do they continue to do it? If the if there are these ethical problems that or it defies an ethical principle that most people agree on? Or is the and that one question is the second question? Should we have regulation for this sort of thing? I suppose the first one is already kind of answered in my mind, like, they're just going to do it. So I guess it would be maybe we can sort of go down the like, so much regulation. I don't really like to talk about compliance and regulation all that much. But it does seem like there's certain things like do we need like, that seems like it could be like a pretty simple thing to get regulated. Or do you would you agree that it seems like it would take regulation to get even that low bar of sort of an ethical principle implemented across across business or commerce or whatever you might say? So I guess, since I'm not a regulatory expert, my first thing to say is that I don't really know, I'm relatively agnostic about what the regulation ought to be. I think that there are probably lots of laws on the books about how you can't deceive consumers. I mean, at least there were, you know, two weeks ago, I don't know, I don't know in the US, whether those laws are still a thing. But putting that to the side, so I think there's probably laws around you can't deceive, you know, can't engage in fraudulent interactions, blah, blah, blah, blah. And I could see a world in which rather than having regulations, we have lawsuits, and it gets sort of settled in in the courts, instead of by a large regulatory process that would take many, many, many years. So I could see that I could see things unfolding that way. And that would be fine by me. Yeah, I mean, I definitely am of the opinion as well that uses leverage as many existing laws on the books as you can, that would apply as opposed to creating new regulation. It does seem, though, however, that for whatever reason, these new technologies, people just feel differently about them. Like, case in point, you may have seen the other day that someone or the sister and brother-in-law of a victim of a murder in court used an AI, generative AI sort of thing to give the victim's statement to the judge. And it's like, there are already existing, I'm not a lawyer, and this is not really my space, but I presume that you wouldn't be able to use like a ventriloquist with a puppet in court or something, or like, here's a robot that looks like my brother. And here's his statement. But yet, it was permitted to use like a generative AI avatar. So to me, it's sort of like, I would love it if we could use as many of the existing frameworks and laws, but it seems like they're sort of thrown out the window. Yeah, I did hear that case. And the judge was persuaded, which is so stupid. That's right. I actually, I think something different from that kind of case. I mean, yes, should we allow that sort of thing? You know, I don't know what the laws are, blah, blah, blah. I didn't see anything saying this was, you know, this is illegal or something along those lines. What it says to me, though, is that, how do I put this? I'm not convinced that sort of labeling things, oh, this is AI generated, it's going to make much of a difference. So you said, oh, everyone is, you know, everyone is for this, you know, making sure that people know that they're interacting with an AI, as though that were, you know, a panacea, that that's just going to fix the problem. But it's not. And the reason is that we do a lot of our, here's a short version of the argument. A lot of a lot, many of our decisions are motivated by our underlying emotions. We can be emotionally attached to works of fiction that we know to be works of fiction. And when we're interacting with an AI generated, whatever it is, it's, you know, it's fiction that we're interacting with that we could have a significant emotional reaction to, and that emotional reaction can in turn, drive certain kinds of decisions. So the fact that if you like the prefrontal lobe knows, right, this is a, this is AI generated, it's not real. It doesn't really, I don't, I don't think it really makes that necessary, not in all cases, anyway, that big of a difference in how we actually behave. You know, so so think about for a different kind of case, or deepfaking on say, social media feed, let's call it, let's say it's election stuff, right? And so let's say you see, you know, whoever your hated politician is engaging in some disgusting activity, and you know, it's AI generated, still, you're going to feel disgust, you're going to say, I know it's not real, but there's something to that there's like a kernel of truth to that, because you're going to feel that kernel. And so you know, you're going to go on voting as you as you're going to vote. So you know, I don't think that labeling stuff, hey, this is AI generated is really much of a fix at all. I think in certain circumstances, you're right, like it, it, like the election, or like advertising or persuasive materials are going to have an effect, whether or not it's labeled or not, you're gonna you will have an idea will have been put into your mind, whether or not you know, it's a generator or not. But I just like the idea more more of a feeling a feeling of fear. Sure. I think about think about companion bots, like the AI companion bots who are, you know, can also be lovers. The people know they're that it's AI, right? That's right. But they just got this feeling. And the feeling is somewhere between non rational and irrational. And the label doesn't doesn't do a thing from, you know, making them extremely upset if you were to disconnect their AI permanently, or just change the terms and conditions or how the API is called in certain ways. Or I mean, it's just it's crazy to, for me, to put that much control in the hands of like, a software platform. But that's another that's another topic. I do. I do think that there are, I don't want to say this. There are certain disadvantages that were I interviewed Lewis Rosenberg, and I don't know if you're familiar with his work, but he has this paper called like, the manipulation problem. And so yeah, the whether or not you know that something is an AI, you're we're going to interact with them, and they're going to be providing services, selling to us, yeah, relationships with us, etc. And I found it very interesting that he sort of he says things like, well, it's going to know everything about you, and you're going to know nothing about it, like you can't. Whereas with a human that's trying to sell to you, you might take up on cues and have some red flags. But with an AI, there's none of that. And not only does it know everything about you, and probably your purchase history, and this and that, but when you throw in biometrics, and all the other things coming down the line, we're going to be at a tremendous disadvantage. So hopefully, people that are trading those products are asking the right ethical questions as they develop those things. Yeah, I mean, they're probably not. But, you know, there, there's a way of talking about this that I think is a bit too doomsday. I mean, I do think that there's going to be ample opportunities for certain kinds of manipulation. It's but, you know, people get a little bit nuts, I think. So this is slightly related, we're talking about, you know, micro targeting for ads, and people like to scream, it's so manipulative, blah, blah, blah, you know, it's an invasion of privacy. And I always think, like, I don't know, they sold me a towel, you know, it's like, they, you're right, I clicked on an ad for a towel where the sand, where the sand from the beach just sort of falls off the towels and stick to it. They showed me the ad a bunch of times. And I finally was like, you know what, that would be awesome. I bought the towels. They're awesome. I love them. Okay, you know, am I am I some massive victim of manipulation? I find it hard to see that. You know, so they're sort of, we have to think carefully about what constitutes manipulation. You have to think carefully about what constitutes, you know, really leading us astray from our true whatever that would mean, desires, needs, happiness, blah, blah, blah. Some things are serious. If it's, you know, if we're talking about outright manipulation, like, you know, for high stakes issues, let's say who you're going to vote for. Right. Political views. Yeah, that, that, that worries me. They're, you know, it's going to encourage me to buy shirts from this store. I don't like it. I don't like it. But I'm also, you know, I'm not going to say the sky is falling because of that. No, I suppose the argument is that it's not that far a distance between, and I'm not, I don't know the answer to that, but between selling you the towel and changing your political views. See, I, I, I'm, I've yet to see, which is not to say that it's not there to be seen. I just haven't seen it yet. An account of what online manipulation looks like that really is like where you think I see how they can do these, these things and they can almost control us where our autonomy is undermined and it's tall order. So here's what I do. Here's what I do buy. I buy that they can manipulate populations, you know, holes. So I bet they could run an ad, do a bunch of tests, and then they can relatively reliably predict we're going to move, you know, 1.3% of people this way rather than that way. That strikes me as plausible. It strikes me as a lot less plausible that they're going to be able to predict with a high degree of probability, the behaviors or response to an ad or something like that, or a series of ads for Scott in particular, or for Reed in particular. So there's population level manipulation where, you know, of the set of people, some subset are going to go this way rather than that way as a result of our online behaviors. That's a big difference from individual manipulation where I'm going to show Scott this thing and now we're going to move him. He's going to be, you know, the opposite end of the political spectrum by the time we're done with him. That strikes me as fanciful. The other thing is that, and then I'll shut up. I always want to hear more. Please, this is just supposed to talk. Come on, this is what this is about. Well, I want to hear a lot more about what it means to undermine someone's autonomy and what constitutes manipulation. You know, if I give you a reasonable incentive, if I say, hey, I'll give you $5, I'll give you $1,000 to, you know, whatever, do this thing, to attend this whatever, meeting, whatever it is, or I'll give you 20% discount, you've, in some broad sense of the term, manipulated me, right? How have you changed my behavior? By giving me a rational incentive. There's all sorts of ways that you can talk to me that I'm like, yeah, okay, I have a choice on my hands now. Should I do that? Should I not? So one is what constitutes sort of underhanded manipulation as opposed to, I don't know, overhanded manipulation, like giving a discount code. And then the other question is, what would constitute undermining the capacity for someone to choose? Because it's not like we're these passive receptacles that it's just, oh, I was washed over by these ads. And, you know, now I'm a Nazi. That's not how it works. You've got to make decisions. I mean, I made a decision to click on that ad to go on this feed. I made a decision to do this. I mean, so there's lots of decision points. And we also have to take our share of the responsibility instead of blaming, you know, social media companies. So look, I'm not saying they can't manipulate people, but one, it seems to me at the population level, not the individual level. And I don't yet see an account of how doing these things undermines the human capacity for choice. Mitigates or I'll say, okay, I'll say one thing that I'll really shut up. There's undermining and then there's turning the volume down on, right? So if you undermine my autonomy, I've got no autonomy. And then there's decreasing my autonomy and maybe it does decrease autonomy, but still I want to hear the ways in which autonomy is decreased. And is it a way that's new? Like, oh, it limits your choices. Well, when you go to a store, your choices are limited because that store bought what they bought. And so now that's the, you go to a restaurant, that's their menu. You'd have to choose from their menu, you know? So anyway, that, that was a bit of a ramble, but that's okay. No, I think you, you, you I thought of something while you were talking where there was this recent, I'll have to find it. If I can, I'll put it in the show notes, but it's when we talk about AI for good and AI for not bad or AI for bad, I find it's interesting, perhaps even slightly hypocritical where the things we were just discussing would be maybe considered AI for bad. But then there was this, this study where they had people who were already kind of believing in weird conspiracy theories. I shouldn't say weird necessarily, but flat earthers, all kinds of weird stuff like that. And they had large language models talk to them and supposedly bring them back from the edge a little bit. Right. And so even though that's, that's manipulation, that's, you know, but in this case it was like condoned, like, Hey, this is AI for good. We, we manipulated them and changed their beliefs, but something more considered a little more yes aside. Right. So that to me is a slightly hypocritical even. Well, it's, it's playing fast and loose with the term manipulation and not being clear about what you mean by it. So you might say, is it manipulation? If I get to, if I get them to do what's actually in fact good for them, maybe I, but what, maybe it is, maybe it's, I don't know. What, what do you mean? What, what does it amount to, to manipulate someone? When I hear the word manipulate, I hear undermining of autonomy or, or massively decreasing someone's ability to make a choice. Something like that. So something along those lines. This is a little bit of that consequential ethics, right? Like, is it better for society to take, to, to manipulate some people who might be otherwise harmful back towards a safer space for the good of everyone or something like that? I think that's slightly different because one, there's a question about what constitutes manipulation. Relatedly, is manipulation necessarily morally objectionable in itself? Let's say, because you think it's undermines people's autonomy and that's intrinsically wrong because it fails to demonstrate respect for persons or something along those lines. Failure to respect their dignity as human beings, blah, blah, blah. But you might think we should do it anyway. And this was actually, this was Plato. So, you know, old school, you know, now we're talking real old school philosophy. That's in old school. There was something that he called the noble lie, where you tell some, you tell the masses a certain lie because it's good for them and society as a whole. So that's manipulating for the sake of the good. And then there's a question about whether that's, you know, it cannot be ever beyond the ethical open up. So there are these questions about, we could settle the debate. We could say, yes, this is a case of manipulation. It's, it's in itself, if you like, ethically bad, there's a wrong being done to the person who's being manipulated. Nevertheless, there's other considerations that should make us conclude that on balance, we ethically ought to do it. That's a, that's a possible position. It's a sort of a flip from what we started off talking about when we were talking about doing the ethically or perhaps morally right thing for the wrong reasons. And here it's sort of perhaps doing a wrong thing for the right reasons. That's okay. Yeah, well, that's right. That's right. Um, I have one more. Okay. So I think this is, I mean, this could go on for a long time. The show is called, please. Yeah, I'm going to say, I'm going to say one last thing, which is, No, please say more than one last thing. There's a way in which the AI ethics space is dominated by people of a certain ethical persuasion. Um, mostly on the left, I think it's fair to say for what it's worth. I, I'm somewhere on the left. Um, I'm certainly left of center. Um, but there are certain there's, there's, there's, you got this left of center and there's like really left of center. And I think that there's a lot of talk among the people who do AI ethics or the AI ethics space, or we like to talk about AI and the ethical implications where you get these assumptions about what's ethically good and bad and right and wrong, like targeted advertising, like data collection. And it's not that the views are implausible. I think they're no, they're plausible views for sure, but they're not the only views on offer. And so that's a, this is a nice example of what I said earlier, where there's my personal views, if you like, about what I think is on the ethical up and up and what's not. And then there's what, um, organizations think is on the ethical up and up and what kinds of decisions they should make. And I don't, I don't confuse those two. So I might say to a client, look, a lot of people think that engaging in this kind of interactions with people is ethically objectionable. Here's the reasons they'll give it to you. Here's the reasons for thinking that they're wrong and that it's not ethically objectionable, but at the end of the day, it's up to you. So this is, again, this is what I would do with a client. If we were talking about this kind of issue is I'd lay out the reasons for and against and get them to understand what the positions are and then leave it with them to decide. And they're going to make a decision that is partly informed by their sense of what's commensurate with their ethical values. It's also going to be informed by their risk appetite. It's going to be informed by what legal says. It's going to be informed by the opportunity with what the chief revenue officer says. And so it's going to be a, you know, multifactored deliberation about where they actually fall on that. Right. And to my earlier point, I think they would also factor in whether this is legal or not. If this was in an article on the front page of a wonderful newspaper, how would our customers react and would they, would they decide not to buy our products anymore? Exactly. Yeah. Okay. All right. I have a, a, this is sort of a, this is a non AI philosophical question or something that I find that is, I want your take on this. It's something I've been thinking about for several years. It seems like a lot of smart people in both like hard sciences, like physics, astrophysics, that whole realm, and very smart people, philosophers, many, not all, but it seems like the vast majority fall on the side of, there is no free will, whether it's philosophy or physics. Right. I know this is a little bit of a left turn, but I figured we'd end on something kind of fun. So do you have a position on that? Or, or I guess I would say if you do or do not, but what is your, am I wrong in seeing that like there seems to be an awful lot of smart people on those two sides of very, you know, seemingly different academic views or sectors that are all kind of decided, yeah, there's no free will. It's all deterministic. Yeah. So there's a, there's a lot to say, but obviously there's a lot to say about this. And I taught, I taught seminars on free will. And I think it's a totally fascinating subject. So the one thing to say sort of get the, I don't know, the rude bit out of the way, the physicists generally don't know what they're talking about. They just don't. And that's because they're physicists and whether we have free will as a philosophical issue, not a physics issue. So every once in a while, and who did, someone did this recently, Robert Sapolsky or something like that. That was the famous physicist, physicist who wrote a book lately called determined that you came out, maybe I have to check it out. Okay. I mean, I wouldn't, but all right, look, look, let's go to ancient. I'm going to go to ancient Greek Greece again for a second. I love it. It makes sense. Oh, that's nice. I'm going to Greece soon. So we can talk about that. So look, ancient Greek, they figure out, they, they reason their way to the existence of the Adam. And they think this is the, this is the smallest thing. I think it was even definitional. Like the Adam is by definition, the smallest things. Okay. Obviously they didn't have, you know, the kinds of materials we have now is just, they reasoned their way to it. You know, something like, well, if I keep shaving off this piece of wood, it's going to get smaller and smaller and smaller. Eventually I'll get to the smallest possible thing that it could be. That's an Adam. Okay. And at one point they posited things like an Adams move in, in a deterministic fashion. So they didn't quite have this language of, you know, the laws of physics and stuff like that. But the, the, the, the claim was that determinism is true, which is to say that everything that happens happens with the probability of one. And, and that's a problem for free will. Okay. So this, this, this, this issue of does determinism undermine free will has been around literally for millennia. Philosophers have been discussing it literally for millennia. Fast forward a little bit, you get to Lucretius, I think we're in Rome now, ancient Rome and Lucretius says, no, no, no, listen, there are some Adams, you know, some operate deterministically, but sometimes Adams indeterminate indeterministically swerve. This is his word swerve. I believe that's the translation from Latin. I assume from left, left, or right. Well, you know, it can sort of left, right. And it, and it's a probability of less than one, whether it swerves left or right. And that's where our free, our free will lives. It's in that, that indeterminism of the Adams allows us to have free will. Again, this is like 2000 years ago, or you want, you know, 1500 years, whatever it was, I don't know. Um, and philosophers have debated number one, does determinism undermine free will? Some say yes, some say no. Philosophers have argued, some have argued that determinism is necessary for free will. So that's an interesting twist. Some have argued that indeterminism undermines free will. And some have argued that it helps to secure free will. And philosophers have literally argued about this. Yeah. I mean, if there's a sort of, you know, what philosophers essentially do is we map out the possible positions in logical space. It's like, what are the possible, what kinds of positions could one possibly defend? And then you're going to find someone who's smart defending one, you know, let's say, let's, let's keep things simple. Um, take a two by two matrix. So determinism and indeterminism, or, you know, on one side and on the other, yes, free will, no free will. So you got four boxes, you got super smart people in all four of those boxes across roughly across roughly two millennia. What's in vogue now among philosophers? That's a different kind of question. It's an empirical question, which I don't totally know the answer. My vague sense of it from being around philosophers for, you know, decades, is that I think most are probably compatibilists of some kind. And a compatibilist thinks that usually, I mean, there's two kinds of compatibilists, but usually, I would say that they're determinists. Um, and they think that free will is compatible with determinism. You asked me for my view at the top of all this, and I, I kind of demurred. I don't, I don't know. And that's, that's, I don't know. I don't have a, I don't, I don't have a position. I mean, it's the kind of thing where, you know, I wake up one day and I think, yeah, yeah, we've got, you know, we've, we've got free will. I wake up the next day and I think, no, not really. The arguments get so subtle, so complex. Um, when arguments, when, when philosophy goes at a, to a certain point of depth, my, my view is just to say, oh yeah, I, I don't know. And this is actually, there's a, there's sort of meta philosophical debate or discussion to be had about what are the grounds on which you can justifiably come to a conclusion on these kinds of things when there's, for instance, so many smart people who disagree about this sort of thing. And it's so complicated. And I think some people, this is another thing that philosophers will do debate about. No, no, you know, you should come to a conclusion for the reasons that you do, and you have reasons for thinking that they're wrong and blah, blah, blah, and it's all justified. And then I think that there are some who think you should suspend judgment, um, in the face of all that complexity and, and, and disagreement among experts. Uh, and now we're, you know, off doing more philosophy. Got it. I would, I would say, and I don't know how much this it's sort of just like anecdotal evidence. It sure feels like I have free will. I haven't, you know, that doesn't really, it's neither here nor there, but, um, and I feel like, and I, I'm, you know, I can only speak for myself, but it does feel like a lot of other people also feel like they have free will. Uh, but who knows, uh, if that, I mean, it's not proof, but, um, well, yeah, it's definitely not proof. So here's what I like to say. So when I, when I used to, when I, I'll give you the, the, the very brief spiel that I used to give students, which is, uh, uh, it was something like this. Look, uh, you know, you take a bouncy ball, let's say the world is determined. I'm just going to say, you know, so you throw a bouncy ball off the wall at 45 degrees, fix all the other variables. It'll bounce off at 45 degrees. Um, do that with, you know, billiard balls on a pool table, you hit the cue ball. And if you, if you knew, you know, the force with which you hit the ball, the weight of the balls, the friction between the balls and the felt, the spin of the balls, the blah, blah, blah, blah, you'd be able to predict where the balls are going to end up after they all stopped rolling around. Right. So now we go big bang, big bang goes boom, yada, yada, you know, gases are out there in space, yada, yada, the solar system forms, yada, yada, the earth forms, yada, yada, little fishy things, yada, yada, mammals, yada, yada, humans, yada, yada, your parents, yada, yada, you. And now it's yada, yada, you making this decision right here, right now. And it feels to you like you can choose A or B or C or D or whatever. It feels like, yeah, I'm, I'm free to choose whatever I want. But that feeling is a function of your ignorance of all the countless causal factors that brought you to right here, right now. So if you knew, just like with the billiard balls, if you knew all the causal factors, you would know what you're going to do. But since you don't know it, since you're necessarily steeped in ignorance about all the causes and the forces of those causes and how they interact, blah, blah, blah, you get this, if you like, feeling or this gap, which you think, oh, yeah, it's all up to me. But no, no, that's just because you're ignorant about all the causes. I've seen the show, it's several years old now. Is it devs? Have you heard of this show? I haven't. It's on my list, and then I've never watched it. Okay. Well, I'll try not to be too spoilery. But essentially, a tech company builds a quantum computer that computes every, let's say, running back all the way to like the big bang, let's say, I'm not, I'm not probably not saying exactly. Yeah. But so that they can then move the dial of time back and forth, you know, go back and see certain things and also predict the future. Because if we just calculate, like you said, if it were all if you knew every single reaction of every molecule and atom going back to the big bang, then could you could you anyway, that's it's pretty interesting show. Nick Offerman and some other people. But yada yada read. I think we're going to leave it there. Okay, it sounds good. Yeah. Hey, I really appreciate your time. We're at over 40 minutes. So I think that's that's pretty good for for my show. It's usually I'm really having a struggle getting it to be quick bits anymore. But that's okay. It's fun to talk for a little while. And I really do appreciate your time. And I will, again, put links to all your work in the show notes. Reed Blackman, CEO of virtue, right? Is that I want to make sure that's what it is. That's it. Okay, cool. I didn't want to make a mistake at the end. All right. Appreciate it. No, thanks for the great questions. Transcribed by https://otter.ai
